README.md, before:

# Linux SSH Brute Force Monitoring & Automation
🔐 Project Overview
This project demonstrates detection and automation of SSH brute-force login attempts on a Linux system using:
	•	Bash scripting
	•	Log analysis
	•	Real-time monitoring
	•	Cron job automation
  
  🧪 Phase 1 – Log Analysis
  Analyzed: /var/log/auth.log 
  Used: grep "Failed password" /var/log/auth.log
  Extracted source IP addresses and counted  failed login attempts.
  
   🔄 Phase 2 – Live Monitoring
 Built a continuous monitoring loop that:
	•	Parses SSH failed logins
	•	Counts failed attempts per IP
	•	Triggers alert when attempts ≥ 3
	•	Displays real-time updates
  ### 📸 Live Monitoring
  ![Live Monitoring](screenshots/live_monitoring.png)
  
  ### 🚨 Alert Escalation
  ![Alert Increasing](screenshots/alert_increasing.png)
  
  ### ⏱ Cron Automation
  Configured scheduled detection: */5 * * * * /home/ugoo/ssh_bruteforce_detector.sh >> /home/ugoo/cron_log.txt 2>&1
  📸 Cron Configuration
  ![Cron Schedule](screenshots/cron_schedule.png)

### 📄 Execution Logs
 Verified automated execution: cat /home/ugoo/cron_log.txt
 📸 Cron Log Output
![Cron Log](screenshots/cron_log_execution.png)

### 📊 Generated Security Report
Script produces structured detection report: cat /home/ugoo/ssh_security_report.txt
📸 Security Report Output
![Security Report](screenshots/security_report.pmg)

🛠 Skills Demonstrated
	•	Linux log analysis
	•	Bash scripting
	•	Regex filtering
	•	Security monitoring
	•	Cron automation
	•	Incident simulation
	•	Detection engineering fundamentals

  🚀 Future Improvements
	•	Log forwarding to SIEM
	•	Integration with Wazuh
	•	Alert email notification
	•	IP blocking automation

Commit message:

### commit title:
Updated log forwarding item and added improved IP extraction logic details.

README.md, after:

# Linux SSH Brute Force Monitoring & Automation
🔐 Project Overview
This project demonstrates detection and automation of SSH brute-force login attempts on a Linux system using:
	•	Bash scripting
	•	Log analysis
	•	Real-time monitoring
	•	Cron job automation
  
  🧪 Phase 1 – Log Analysis
  Analyzed: /var/log/auth.log 
  Used: grep "Failed password" /var/log/auth.log
  Extracted source IP addresses and counted  failed login attempts.
  
   🔄 Phase 2 – Live Monitoring
 Built a continuous monitoring loop that:
	•	Parses SSH failed logins
	•	Counts failed attempts per IP
	•	Triggers alert when attempts ≥ 3
	•	Displays real-time updates
  ### 📸 Live Monitoring
  ![Live Monitoring](screenshots/live_monitoring.png)
  
  ### 🚨 Alert Escalation
  ![Alert Increasing](screenshots/alert_increasing.png)
  
  ### ⏱ Cron Automation
  Configured scheduled detection: */5 * * * * /home/ugoo/ssh_bruteforce_detector.sh >> /home/ugoo/cron_log.txt 2>&1
  📸 Cron Configuration
  ![Cron Schedule](screenshots/cron_schedule.png)

### 📄 Execution Logs
 Verified automated execution: cat /home/ugoo/cron_log.txt
 📸 Cron Log Output
![Cron Log](screenshots/cron_log_execution.png)

### 📊 Generated Security Report
Script produces structured detection report: cat /home/ugoo/ssh_security_report.txt
📸 Security Report Output
![Security Report](screenshots/security_report.pmg)

🛠 Skills Demonstrated
	•	Linux log analysis
	•	Bash scripting
	•	Regex filtering
	•	Security monitoring
	•	Cron automation
	•	Incident simulation
	•	Detection engineering fundamentals

  🚀 Future Improvements
	•	Log forw📸arding to SIEM
	•	Integration with Wazuh
	•	Alert email notification
	•	IP blocking automation
	
### 🔧 Improved IP Extraction Logic
Initially, the script extracted a fixed field position from auth.log, which caused incorrect username parsing.
The logic was upgraded to dynamically detect the keyword "from" and extract the following field (source IP address):
```bash
awk '{for(i=1;i<=NF;i++) if($i=="from") print $(i+1)}'
📸Screenshot:
![Improved IP Detection](screenshots/improved_ip_detection_logic.png)
